# 2005-4
&emsp;&emsp;Everybody loves a fat pay rise. Yet pleasure at your own can <span style="color:#F56C6C">vanish</span> if you learn that a colleague has been given a bigger one. Indeed, if he has a <span style="color:#F56C6C">reputation</span> for <span style="color:#F56C6C">slacking</span>, you might even be <span style="color:#F56C6C">outraged</span>. Such behaviour is regarded as "all too human", with the <span style="color:#F56C6C">underlying assumption</span> that other animals would not be <span style="color:#F56C6C">capable</span> of this finely developed sense of <span style="color:#F56C6C">grievance</span>. But a study by Sarah Brosnan and Frans de Waal of Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia, which has just been published in *Nature*, suggests that <u>it is all too monkey</u>, as well.

&emsp;&emsp;The researchers studied the behaviour of female brown capuchin monkeys. They look cute. They are good-natured, co-operative creatures, and they share their food <span style="color:#F56C6C">readily</span>. Above all, like their female human <span style="color:#F56C6C">counterparts</span>, they tend to pay much closer attention to the value of "goods and services" than males.

&emsp;&emsp;Such characteristics make them perfect <span style="color:#F56C6C">candidates</span> for Dr. Brosnan's and Dr. de Waal's study. The researchers spent two years teaching their monkeys to exchange tokens for food. Normally, the monkeys were happy enough to exchange pieces of rock for slices of cucumber. However, when two monkeys were placed in separate but adjoining <span style="color:#F56C6C">chambers</span>, so that each could observe what the other was getting in return for its rock, their behaviour became <span style="color:#F56C6C">markedly</span> different.

&emsp;&emsp;In the world of capuchins grapes are luxury goods (and much <span style="color:#F56C6C">preferable</span> to cucumbers). So when one monkey was handed a grape in exchange for her token, the second was <span style="color:#F56C6C">reluctant</span> to hand hers over for a mere piece of cucumber. And if one received a grape without having to provide her token in exchange at all, the other either <span style="color:#F56C6C">tossed</span> her own token at the reseracher or out of the chamber, or refused to accept the slice of cucumber. Indeed, the mere presence of a grape in the other chamber (without an actual monkey to eat it) was enough to induce <span style="color:#F56C6C">resentment</span> in a female capuchin.

&emsp;&emsp;The researchers suggest that capuchin monkeys, like humans, are guided by social emotions. In the wild, they are a co-operative, group-living species. Such co-operation is likely to be stable only when each animal feels it is not being cheated. Feelings of <span style="color:#F56C6C">righteous indignation</span>, it seems, are not the preserve of people alone. Refusing a lesser reward completely makes these feelings <span style="color:#F56C6C">abundantly</span> clear to other members of the group. However, whether such a sense of fairness <span style="color:#F56C6C">evolved</span> independently in capuchins and humans, or whether it <span style="color:#F56C6C">stems</span> from the common ancestor that the species had 35 million years ago, is, as yet, an unanswered question.
